DOCSP-36993 Custom types (#30)
mongodb/docs-pymongo: source/fundamentals/data-formats/custom-types.txt

.. _pymongo-custom-types:

============
Custom Types
============

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: tutorial

.. meta::
   :keywords: codec, serialize, deserialize

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to create a custom type with {+driver-short+}.
This guide describes how to subclass ``~bson.codec_options.TypeCodec`` to write a type
codec, which you can use to populate a ``~bson.codec_options.TypeRegistry``.
You can then use the type registry to create a custom-type-aware
``~pymongo.collection.Collection``. Read and write operations
issued against the resulting collection object transparently manipulate
documents as they are saved to or retrieved from MongoDB.

Setting Up
----------

First, create a new database:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> from pymongo import MongoClient
   >>> client = MongoClient()
   >>> client.drop_database("custom_type_example")
   >>> db = client.custom_type_example

> This example uses the ``~decimal.Decimal`` type from Python's standard library. Since the
> BSON library's ``~bson.decimal128.Decimal128`` type--that implements
> the ``IEEE 754 decimal128 decimal-based floating-point`` numbering format--is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example uses the ``~decimal.Decimal`` type from Python's standard library. The
BSON library's ``~bson.decimal128.Decimal128`` type, which implements
the IEEE 754 decimal128 decimal-based floating-point numbering format, is
```

distinct from Python's built-in ``~decimal.Decimal`` type, attempting

> to save an instance of ``Decimal`` with PyMongo, results in a

Reviewer: Can't make a suggestion on it in GH, but I would change the end of line 48 to" "type. Trying"

> to save an instance of ``Decimal`` with PyMongo, results in a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to save an instance of ``Decimal`` with PyMongo results in a
```

``~bson.errors.InvalidDocument`` exception.

.. code-block:: python

   >>> from decimal import Decimal
   >>> num = Decimal("45.321")
   >>> db.test.insert_one({"num": num})
   Traceback (most recent call last):
   ...
   bson.errors.InvalidDocument: cannot encode object: Decimal('45.321'), of type: <class 'decimal.Decimal'>

.. _custom-type-type-codec:

The ``~bson.codec_options.TypeCodec`` Class

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: don't think it's super important, but just for consistency

```suggestion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

  ``python_type`` and ``bson_type`` properties, and the
  ``transform_python()`` and ``transform_bson()`` methods.

The type codec for the custom type must define how to convert a
``~decimal.Decimal`` instance into a
``~bson.decimal128.Decimal128`` instance and vice-versa. 

Use the ``TypeCodec`` base class to define your codec:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> from bson.decimal128 import Decimal128
   >>> from bson.codec_options import TypeCodec
   >>> class DecimalCodec(TypeCodec):
   ...     python_type = Decimal  # the Python type acted upon by this type codec
   ...     bson_type = Decimal128  # the BSON type acted upon by this type codec
   ...     def transform_python(self, value):
   ...         """Function that transforms a custom type value into a type
   ...         that BSON can encode."""
   ...         return Decimal128(value)
   ...     def transform_bson(self, value):
   ...         """Function that transforms a vanilla BSON type value into our
   ...         custom type."""
   ...         return value.to_decimal()
   ...
   >>> decimal_codec = DecimalCodec()

.. _custom-type-type-registry:

The ``~bson.codec_options.TypeRegistry`` Class

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

The decoding treatment of ``~bson.binary.Binary`` types having
``subtype = 0`` by the ``bson`` module varies slightly depending on the
version of the Python runtime in use. This must be taken into account while
writing a ``TypeDecoder`` that modifies how to decode this datatype.

On Python 3.x, ``~bson.binary.Binary`` data (``subtype = 0``) decodes
as a ``bytes`` instance:

.. code-block:: pycon

     >>> # On Python 3.x.
     >>> from bson.binary import Binary
     >>> newcoll = db.get_collection("new")
     >>> newcoll.insert_one({"_id": 1, "data": Binary(b"123", subtype=0)})
     >>> doc = newcoll.find_one()
     >>> type(doc["data"])
     bytes

On Python 2.7.x, the same data decodes as a ``~bson.binary.Binary``
instance:

.. code-block:: pycon

   >>> # On Python 2.7.x
   >>> newcoll = db.get_collection("new")
   >>> doc = newcoll.find_one()
   >>> type(doc["data"])
   bson.binary.Binary

As a consequence of this disparity, you must set the ``bson_type`` attribute

> on you ``~bson.codec_options.TypeDecoder`` classes differently,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on your ``~bson.codec_options.TypeDecoder`` classes differently,
```

This callable is the **fallback encoder**, and like the ``transform_python``
method, it accepts an unencodable value as a parameter and returns a
BSON-encodable value. 

The following fallback encoder encodes python's ``~decimal.Decimal`` type to a ``~bson.decimal128.Decimal128``:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> def fallback_encoder(value):
   ...     if isinstance(value, Decimal):
   ...         return Decimal128(value)
   ...     return value
   ...

After declaring the callback, create a type registry and codec options
with this fallback encoder before initializing a collection:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> type_registry = TypeRegistry(fallback_encoder=fallback_encoder)
   >>> codec_options = CodecOptions(type_registry=type_registry)
   >>> collection = db.get_collection("test", codec_options=codec_options)
   >>> collection.drop()

You can now encode instances of ``~decimal.Decimal``:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> collection.insert_one({"num": Decimal("45.321")})
   InsertOneResult(ObjectId('...'), acknowledged=True)
   >>> mydoc = collection.find_one()
   >>> pprint.pprint(mydoc)
   {'_id': ObjectId('...'), 'num': Decimal128('45.321')}

.. note::

>    Invoke fallback encoders *after* attempts to encode the particular value
>    with standard BSON encoders and any configured type encoders have failed.
>    Therefore, in a type registry configured with a type encoder and fallback
>    encoder that both target the same custom type, the behavior specified in
>    the type encoder prevails.

Reviewer: The second sentence starts with "Therefore," which makes me think the first sentence is explaining something, but it's actually imperative ("Invoke fallback encoders...").

Does this suggestion match the meaning of the original?

```suggestion
   {+driver-short+} invokes fallback encoders *after* attempts to encode the particular value
   with standard BSON encoders and any configured type encoders have failed.
   Therefore, in a type registry configured with a type encoder and fallback
   encoder that both target the same custom type, the behavior specified in
   the type encoder prevails.
```

Author: Good catch, your suggestion is what it should have been

Encoding Unknown Types
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This example describes how to use a fallback encoder to save
arbitrary objects to the database. It uses the standard library's
``pickle`` module to serialize the unknown types, and works only for types that

> are pickleable.

Reviewer: had to google this, but the [pickle docs](https://docs.python.org/3/library/pickle.html#pickle.PickleBuffer) use "picklable", so i would go with that. (google also suggested "pickleball", which would be a fun addition to the docs.)

```suggestion
are picklable.
```

Author: pickleball is preferred

Define a fallback encoder that pickles whatever objects it receives
and returns them as ``~bson.binary.Binary`` instances with a custom
subtype. The custom subtype allows you to write a TypeDecoder that
identifies pickled artifacts on retrieval and transparently decodes them
back into Python objects:

.. code-block:: python

   import pickle
   from bson.binary import Binary, USER_DEFINED_SUBTYPE

   def fallback_pickle_encoder(value):
       return Binary(pickle.dumps(value), USER_DEFINED_SUBTYPE)

   class PickledBinaryDecoder(TypeDecoder):
       bson_type = Binary

       def transform_bson(self, value):
           if value.subtype == USER_DEFINED_SUBTYPE:
               return pickle.loads(value)
           return value

.. note::

   The preceding example assumes the use of Python 3. If you are using
   Python 2, you must set ``bson_type`` to ``Binary``. See the
   :ref:`decoding-binary-types` section for a detailed explanation.

Finally, create a ``CodecOptions`` instance:

.. code-block:: python

   codec_options = CodecOptions(
       type_registry=TypeRegistry(
           [PickledBinaryDecoder()], fallback_encoder=fallback_pickle_encoder
       )
   )

> You can now round trip your custom objects to MongoDB:

Reviewer: another page i did used "round-trip" with a hyphen. i'm not sure which is correct, but when it's hyphenated, it's clearer to me that it's intended as a single verb

```suggestion
You can now round-trip your custom objects to MongoDB:
```

       {"_id": 1, "str": MyStringType("hello world"), "num": MyNumberType(2)}
   )
   mydoc = collection.find_one()
   assert isinstance(mydoc["str"], MyStringType)
   assert isinstance(mydoc["num"], MyNumberType)

Limitations
-----------

PyMongo's type codec and fallback encoder features have the following
limitations:

- You cannot customize the encoding behavior of Python types that PyMongo
  already understands, such as ``int`` and ``str``.
  Attempting to instantiate a type registry with one or more codecs that act
  on a built-in type results in a ``TypeError``. This limitation extends
  to all subtypes of the standard types.
- Chaining type encoders is not supported. A custom type value, once
  transformed by a codec's ``transform_python`` method, *must* result in a
  type that is BSON-encodable by default, or that can be
  transformed by the fallback encoder into something BSON-encodable. You
  *cannot* transform it a second time by a different type codec.
- The ``~pymongo.database.Database.command`` method does not apply the
  user's TypeDecoders while decoding the command response document.
- ``gridfs`` does not apply custom type encoding or decoding to any

>   documents received from, or returned to the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  documents received from, or returned to, the user.
```
